There are several specific requirements for the PhD degree that represent key milestones in the degree progression. A general overview of this process can be found in the [Civil and Environmental Engineering](https://engineering.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CEE_GraduateProgramHandbook_2023-2024.pdf) and [Geological Engineering](https://engineering.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/GLE_GraduateProgramHandbook.pdf) Handbooks. Specifics of these requirements varies slightly in different groups so this section lays out the specifics in our group.


# Assessment and Qualifying Exam

The Qualifying Exam is intended as an examination of the scientific breadth of knowledge of geologic and scientific concepts relevant to our field, depth of familiarity within the sub-discipline(s) that are most relevant to your research, and overall capacity for scientific reasoning and research design. For students intending to go straight to the PhD, the exam will be taken (typically) by the end of the first year after entry. For students pursuing a PhD after completing the Master’s in our program, the exam will be taken in the first semester after the successful Master’s defense.

The qualifying exam is administered as an examination with both written and oral components however alternate formats may occur. The written component of the Qualifying Exam is administered first (at least 1 week before the oral component) and will consist of a series of questions, written by the student’s G&E Committee, which seek to assess the student’s breadth of knowledge of geologic and scientific concepts relevant to our field and depth of familiarity within the sub-discipline(s) that are most relevant to your research. The exam will typically take the form of 2-4 questions and an article critical evaluation and take place over the span of approximately one week. The student may use course materials or references in answering all questions and must provide appropriate citations for any sources used. 

The primary objective of this process is to identify gaps in knowledge or concepts that may hinder future progress. Identified deficiencies are usually remedied with additional coursework or literature review.

# Preliminary exam

The preliminary exam should be completed within one year of completion of the qualifying exam (approximately). The preliminary exam represents a written document, 35-45 minute presentation, and discussion of the nature and scope of the proposed doctoral dissertation. The written portion should be submitted to the exam committee at least two weeks in advance of the examination. This written portion should generally include the first chapter of the thesis (introduction and literature review), the first chapter of research, and a detailed outline of future chapters. The first chapter of research will generally be a working draft (or published version) of the student’s first paper. The detailed outline of future chapters should include research objectives, hypotheses, and any preliminary data/models collected to date. The presentation is essentially an extended G&E meeting presentation and is encouraged to be practiced during a group meeting prior to the exam. If you have any questions or concerns about this process do not hesitate to raise the discussion during our weekly one-on-one meetings.
